Hierarchical NavigationView API review (#75)
microsoft/microsoft-ui-xaml-specs: active/NavigationView/HierarchicalNav/HierarchicalNavigationView.md

    };
}
```

Selected items will draw their selection indicators along their left edge when in left mode or their bottom edge when in top mode. 
The selected item may not always remain visible.
For example, the selected item may be a child node inside a non-expanded subtree.
In this situation, the first visible ancestor of the selected item will show as selected, and the selection indicator will move as users expand the subtree. 
The entire navigation view will show no more than one selection indicator.

In both Top and Left modes, clicking the arrows on NavigationViewItems will expand or collapse the subtree. Clicking or tapping 
_elsewhere_ on the NavigationViewItem will trigger the `ItemInvoked` event, and it will also collapse or expand the subtree.

## Keyboarding
Users can move focus around the navigation view using their [keyboard](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/design/input/keyboard-interactions). 
The arrow keys expose "inner navigation" within the pane and follow the interactions provided in [tree view](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/design/controls-and-patterns/tree-view).

> - **Up arrow** moves focus to the item directly above the item currently in focus

Reviewer: Presumably this changes slightly when the NavigationView is in Top mode.

Author: @ojhad?

Reviewer 2: Yep, in top nav, the behavior should change for the primary list (the left and right keys are used to move focus between items). 
Navigation in top nav flyouts would be the same as in left nav.

Reviewer 3: That makes sense to me. @ojhad is that how it's implemented?

Reviewer: It's more complicated than that, since there is also the "in flyout/not in flyout" dimension. Something like

| Mode | Up/Down | Right/Left |
|-|-|-|
| Left, not in flyout | Movement | Expand and collapse |
| Top, not in flyout | Expand and collapse(?) | Movement |
| In flyout | Movement | Expand and collapse |

Reviewer 3: How should top-mode handle expanding and collapsing children? In the flyout, it uses up and down to navigate between the children items. Hitting the down key on the parent item of the NavView will expand the list, but how should we go about collapsing it once you're on the first child?

Is tapping the up key twice an option? I don't think left or right would be as intuitive to open or close a vertical-list-flyout.

Reviewer 2: > That makes sense to me. @ojhad is that how it's implemented?

In the current implementation, only invoking the item will expand/collapse. Arrow keys are only used for navigation.

> How should top-mode handle expanding and collapsing children?

Currently, the only way to close a flyout is either by hitting the esc key or by selecting a leaf node

Reviewer 2: > how should we go about collapsing it once you're on the first child?
 
We could potentially detect if you are navigating up from the top most item and change focus that way. Though I don't know if we'd want to close the flyout in a similar manner when the last element is reached and the down key is pressed.

Reviewer 3: I see. I think top-mode can be expanded by the down key on the parent element, and collapsed by hitting the esc key. I'll update the spec later today with all of these details.

Reviewer 2: Here's what a description of the current behavior would be:

- **Up Arrow**
    - When in Left Nav or Flyout, moves focus to the item directly above the item currently in focus
    - When in Top Nav, does nothing

- **Down Arrow**
    - When in Left Nav or Flyout, moves focus the item directly below the item currently in focus; note that the items do not need to be visually adjecent, focus will move from the last item in the pane's list to the settings item.
    - When in Top Nav, does nothing

- **Right Arrow**
    - When in Top Nav, moves focus to the item directly to the right of the item currently in focus
    - When in Left Nav, does nothing

- **Left Arrow**
    - When in Top Nav, moves focus to the item directly to the left the item currently in focus
    - When in Left Nav, does nothing

- **Space/Enter Key**
    - Invokes/Selects item
    - When in Left Expanded mode and item has children, expands/collapses item
    - When in Left Compact/Top mode and item has children, expands children into a flyout and places focus on first item in flyout
    - When in flyout and on leaf node, invokes/selects item and closes flyout

- **Esc Key**
    - When in flyout, closes the flyout

Reviewer 3: @MikeHillberg @oldnewthing @ojhad 
I just added these specifics into the spec to describe the current behavior. I've also opened an issue [#2297](https://github.com/microsoft/microsoft-ui-xaml/issues/2297) so in the future we can add support for arrow keys expanding and collapsing the children items.

However, since we want this to be ready for 2.4 we won't block on these changes as the current behavior leaves things fully functional.

| MenuItems property | Gets the collection of menu items displayed as children of the NavigationViewItem. | |
| MenuItemsSource property | Gets or sets an object source used to generate the children of the NavigationViewItem | |
| IsChildSelected property | A descendant item is selected | |
| IsExpanded property | Gets or sets a value that indicates whether a tree node is expanded. Ignored if there are no menu items. | Analogous to [TreeViewItem.IsExpanded](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Microsoft.UI.Xaml.Controls.TreeViewItem.IsExpanded) |
| HasUnrealizedChildren property | Gets or sets a value that indicates whether the current item has child items that haven't been shown. | Analogous to [TreeViewItem.HasUnrealizedChildren](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Microsoft.UI.Xaml.Controls.TreeViewItem.HasUnrealizedChildren) |
| Expand method |  Expands the specified node in the tree. | Analogous to [TreeView.Expand](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Microsoft.UI.Xaml.Controls.TreeView.Expand) |
| Collapse method |  Collapses the specified node in the tree. | Analogous to [TreeView.Collapse](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Microsoft.UI.Xaml.Controls.TreeView.Collapse) |

> | Expanding event | Occurs when a node in the tree starts to expand. | Analogous to [TreeView.Expanding](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Microsoft.UI.Xaml.Controls.TreeView.Expanding). Sets the HasUnrealizedChildren property and fills the nodes as described [here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/design/controls-and-patterns/tree-view#fill-a-node-when-its-expanding).|

Reviewer: I don't think this sets the HasUnrealizedChildren property. Instead, the app can use the HasUnrealizedChildren property to mark childless items as expandable, and to create those children lazily (at the latest, in the Expanding event handler).

> | Expanding event | Occurs when a node in the tree starts to expand. | Analogous to [TreeView.Expanding](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Microsoft.UI.Xaml.Controls.TreeView.Expanding). Sets the HasUnrealizedChildren property and fills the nodes as described [here](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/design/controls-and-patterns/tree-view#fill-a-node-when-its-expanding).|

Author: ```suggestion
| Expanding event | Occurs when a node in the tree starts to expand. | Analogous to [TreeView.Expanding](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Microsoft.UI.Xaml.Controls.TreeView.Expanding). In order to fill in nodes as they're expanding, set the `HasUnrealizedChildren` property to true, and then add the children during this `Expanding` event. See the TreeView example [fill a node when it's expanding](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/windows/uwp/design/controls-and-patterns/tree-view#fill-a-node-when-its-expanding).|
```

We believe two levels is ideal for usability and comprehension.

NavigationView shows hierarchy in all its pane display modes, including Top and LeftCompact.

*Note:* The following is a comp and will be updated with screenshots before this doc is published.
![NavigationView in Left, LeftCompact, and Top modes showing hierarchy](NavigationView_Hierarchy.png)

# Examples

## Add a hierarchy of items in markup
Declare app navigation hierarchy in markup.

```Xaml
<muxc:NavigationView>
    <muxc:NavigationView.MenuItems>
        <muxc:NavigationViewItem Content="Home" Icon="Home" ToolTipService.ToolTip="Home"/>
        <muxc:NavigationViewItem Content="Collections" Icon="Keyboard" ToolTipService.ToolTip="Collections">
            <muxc:NavigationViewItem.MenuItems>
                <muxc:NavigationViewItem Content="Bookshelf" Icon="Library" 
                    ToolTipService.ToolTip="Bookshelf"/>
                <muxc:NavigationViewItem Content="Mail" Icon="Mail" ToolTipService.ToolTip="Mail"/>
            </muxc:NavigationViewItem.MenuItems>
        </muxc:NavigationViewItem>
    </muxc:NavigationView.MenuItems>
</muxc:NavigationView>

> ```

Author: Recommend: please keep comps and markup aligned.

> ```

Reviewer 3: Working on getting the official screenshots, will make sure they're aligned.

```xaml
<DataTemplate x:Key="NavigationViewMenuItem" x:DataType="local:Category">
    <muxc:NavigationViewItem Content="{x:Bind Name}" MenuItemsSource="{x:Bind Children}"/>
</DataTemplate>

<muxc:NavigationView x:Name="navview" 
    MenuItemsSource="{x:Bind categories, Mode=OneWay}" 
    MenuItemTemplate="{StaticResource NavigationViewMenuItem}" 
    ItemInvoked="{x:Bind OnItemInvoked}" 
    Expanding="OnItemExpanding" 
    Collapsed="OnItemCollapsed" 
    PaneDisplayMode="Left">
    
    <StackPanel Margin="10,10,0,0">
        <TextBlock Margin="0,10,0,0" x:Name="ExpandingItemLabel" Text="Last Expanding: N/A"/>
        <TextBlock x:Name="CollapsedItemLabel" Text="Last Collapsed: N/A"/>
    </StackPanel>    
</muxc:NavigationView>
```

```c#
public class Category
{
    public String Name { get; set; }
    public String Icon { get; set; }
    public ObservableCollection<Category> Children { get; set; }
}
    
public sealed partial class HierarchicalNavigationViewDataBinding : Page
{
    public HierarchicalNavigationViewDataBinding()
    {
        this.InitializeComponent();
           

>         public ObservableCollection<Category> Categories = new ObservableCollection<Category>(){

Reviewer 4: Does this sample compile? Looks like it needs a `}` before this declaration.

Author: Recommend: Add a close brace (to end the constructor). And standardize on curly braces at the start of the next line.

                                    new Category() { Name  = "Menu Item 4", Icon = "Icon" }
                                }
                            }
                        }
                    }
                }
            },
            new Category(){
                Name = "Menu Item 5",
                Icon = "Icon",
                Children = new ObservableCollection<Category>() {
                    new Category(){
                        Name = "Menu Item 6",
                        Icon = "Icon",
                        Children = new ObservableCollection<Category>() {
                            new Category() { Name  = "Menu Item 7", Icon = "Icon" },
                            new Category() { Name  = "Menu Item 8", Icon = "Icon" }
                        }
                    }
                }
            },
            new Category(){ Name = "Menu Item 9", Icon = "Icon" }
        };
    }

    private void OnItemInvoked(object sender, NavigationViewItemInvokedEventArgs e)
    {
        var clickedItem = e.InvokedItem;
        var clickedItemContainer = e.InvokedItemContainer;
    }

>     private void OnItemExpanding(object sender, NavigationViewItemExpandingEventArgs e)

Author: Recommend: 
Events should be ItemExpanding and ItemCollapsed, args should have "Item" in the name

>     {

Author: Recommend: add that link/description to the property/event API pages.

>     {

Reviewer 3: @MikeHillberg Do you mean to add that link and description to the API doc?

(FYI - I'm filling in for Yulia and finishing up this spec)

>     {

Reviewer 3: Added to the API Notes section under the Expanding method. Let me know if you meant to add this somewhere else.

>         var nvib = e.ExpandingItemContainer;

Author: Discussion: Yes, Expanding/Collapsed raise whether it's shown as a flyout or not.

        if(nvib != null)
        {

>             var name = "Last Expanding: " + nvib.Content;

Author: Recommend: please

>             ExpandingItemLabel.Text = name;

Author: Recommend: add Item to the two args types. (This can be delay-calculated so we don't take runtime perf hit.)

>             ExpandingItemLabel.Text = name;

Reviewer 3: Sorry, taking over this spec from Yulia with little background knowledge and I'm a bit confused. I understand the issue at hand, but where do I go about changing the NavigationViewItemExpandingEventArgs ?

>             ExpandingItemLabel.Text = name;

Author: Just like [NavigationViewItemInvokedEventArgs](https://docs.microsoft.com/uwp/api/Windows.UI.Xaml.Controls.NavigationViewItemInvokedEventArgs) has an object-typed InvokedItem property, the NavigationViewExpandingEventArgs class should have an object-typed ExpandingItem property, and NavigationViewCollapsedEventArgs should have a CollapsedItem property.

>             ExpandingItemLabel.Text = name;

Reviewer 3: Added these classes to the API with the appropriate Item properties.

        }
        else
        {

>             ExpandingItemLabel.Text = "Last Expanding: ERROR - No container returned!";

Author: Recommend: Remove the if and else, there will always be a container. Same for the Collapsed example.

        }
    }

    private void OnItemCollapsed(object sender, NavigationViewCollapsedEventArgs e)
    {
        var nvib = e.CollapsedItemContainer;
        if (nvib != null)
        {
            var name = "Last Collapsed: " + nvib.Content;
            CollapsedItemLabel.Text = name;
        }
        else
        {
            CollapsedItemLabel.Text = "Last Collapsed: ERROR - No container returned!";
        }
    }
}
```

## Selection
By default, any item can contain children, be invoked, or be selected.

> There's more detail about the [ItemInvoked](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/api/microsoft.ui.xaml.controls.navigationview.iteminvoked?view=winui-2.3) and [SelectionChanged](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/api/microsoft.ui.xaml.controls.navigationview.selectionchanged?view=winui-2.3) events later in this document.

Author: Discussion: 
* There's a separate hit target for expand/collapse (up/down arrows in the picture). Tapping anywhere else both invokes and expand/collapse.
* In the top nav (horizontal) case there are also arrows, same behavior.

Recommend: Add some descriptive text to the background/overview.

> There's more detail about the [ItemInvoked](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/api/microsoft.ui.xaml.controls.navigationview.iteminvoked?view=winui-2.3) and [SelectionChanged](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/api/microsoft.ui.xaml.controls.navigationview.selectionchanged?view=winui-2.3) events later in this document.

Reviewer 3: Tried to add some more detail at the bottom of this section in upcoming commit. Please let me know if more is needed.

> When providing users with a hierarchical tree of navigation options, you may choose to make parent items non-selectable, for example when your app doesn't have a destination page associated with that parent item.

Reviewer: But it can still be invoked, so what am I supposed to do when invoked? Just ignore the invoke? Do I have to create a custom automation peer that does not support the invoke pattern?

Author: Discussion: 
Note that these APIs exist -- Invoked and SelectsOnInvoked -- but the point here is that regardless of how this property is set, it will expand/collapse. So really this property just got a lot more useful.

To prevent an item from showing the selection indicator when invoked, set its [SelectsOnInvoked](https://docs.microsoft.com/en-us/uwp/api/microsoft.ui.xaml.controls.navigationviewitem.selectsoninvoked?view=winui-2.3) property to False.

```xaml
<DataTemplate x:Key="NavigationViewMenuItem" x:DataType="local:Category">
    <muxc:NavigationViewItem Content="{x:Bind Name}" 
        MenuItemsSource="{x:Bind Children}"
        SelectsOnInvoked="{x:Bind IsLeaf}" />
</DataTemplate>

<muxc:NavigationView x:Name="navview" 
    MenuItemsSource="{x:Bind categories, Mode=OneWay}" 
    MenuItemTemplate="{StaticResource NavigationViewMenuItem}">
   

> </muxcontrols:NavigationView>

Reviewer 4: The XML namespace prefixes here don't appear to match up

Author: Recommend: fix (muxc vs muxcontrols)

```

```c#
public class Category
{
    public String Name { get; set; }
    public String Icon { get; set; }
    public ObservableCollection<Category> Children { get; set; }
    public bool IsLeaf { get; set; }
}
    
public sealed partial class HierarchicalNavigationViewDataBinding : Page
{
    public HierarchicalNavigationViewDataBinding()
    {
        this.InitializeComponent();
           

>         public ObservableCollection<Category> Categories = new ObservableCollection<Category>(){

Reviewer 4: Same note here about the missing `}`

Author: Recommend: Please make compile again

                    Children = new ObservableCollection<Category>() {
                        new Category() { Name  = "Menu Item 7", Icon = "Icon" },
                        new Category() { Name  = "Menu Item 8", Icon = "Icon" }
                    }
                }
            }
        },
        new Category(){ Name = "Menu Item 9", Icon = "Icon" }
    };

    private void OnItemInvoked(object sender, NavigationViewItemInvokedEventArgs e)
    {
        var clickedItem = e.InvokedItem;
        var clickedItemContainer = e.InvokedItemContainer;
    }

    private void OnItemExpanding(object sender, NavigationViewItemExpandingEventArgs e)
    {
        var nvib = e.ExpandingItemContainer;
        var name = "Last Expanding: " + nvib.Content.ToString();
        ExpandingItemLabel.Text = name;
    }

    private void OnItemCollapsed(object sender, NavigationViewItemCollapsedEventArgs e)
    {
        var nvib = e.CollapsedItemContainer;
        var name = "Last Collapsed: " + nvib.Content;
        CollapsedItemLabel.Text = name;
    }
}

public sealed class NavigationViewItemExpandingEventArgs
{
    public NavigationViewItemExpandingEventArgs() {}
    

>     public object ExpandedItem { get; }

Author: ```suggestion
    public object ExpandingItem { get; }
```
